you want to build a sick gaming PC on a
reasonable budget but the thing is 1,000
bucks doesn't stretch as far as it used
to even a console can cost that much
these days maybe the solution is time
travel no not literally I mean taking
your part selection back a few
Generations but how much performance are
you leaving on the table I mean 9600 is
a much higher number than 5700 so it
must be a much better choice right
right no and in fact these two CPUs are
kind of the perfect springboard for our
little investigation SL experiment here
should we just stop buying the latest
Hardware to find out we built two entire
systems using two wildly different
philosophies this one can only use
current generation Parts while this one
can reach as far back into the past as
it wants in search of the best bang for
the buck now as you would expect pricing
is always changing so if we built these
systems a week ago or a week from now we
might get very different computers but
we're still interested in identifying
any Trends tips and tricks that we can
see that might help you get the most out
of your next build or even your current
one we're also interested in identifying
our sponsor MSI power up your rig with
the mpg x87 carbon Wi-Fi mother board it
supports AMD ryzen 9000 CPUs and Ultra
fast Wi-Fi 7 plus it's got RGB check it
out at the link in the video
description AMD doesn't really do new
ryzen 3 CPUs anymore so our brand new pc
was kind of stuck with the ryzen 7 9600
X not that that's a terrible thing I
mean when you can consider that it uses
Zen 5 versus the Zen 3 we're going to be
using in this system you'd think the
answer would be obvious but our older
5700 X 3D has two extra cores and is
packed to the gills with 3D vcash now
this chip hasn't quite achieved 1080 TI
levels of legendary but the more than
$150 savings versus its bigger brother
frees up some very interesting budget
for some big upgrades later on that's
benefit Numero Uno of the oldest gold
philosophy choice not only is there
generally more selection but you can get
substantial discounts on new inbox
Hardware that retailers are hoping to
clear from their shelves that is as long
as you're ready to strike there can be
trade-offs though for example our 5700 X
3D here uses socket am4 which is a dead
end for future upgrades and even for
some current ones even if you paired
this chip with the best compatible
motherboard on the market you'd still be
stuck with pcie Gen 4 and ddr4 memory
although it's worth noting those
probably aren't major considerations at
a $1,000 budget even our SSD we'd have
probably stuck with a Gen 4 boot Drive
even if we had extra money to spend Gen
5 drives cost more don't really benefit
gaming and they run hotter at least they
do today but who knows what the future
holds for devices that'll fit in these
slots and being compatible with future
Hardware is a tangible Advantage for
team shiny here it can also be an
advantage today ddr5 all other things
being equal offers a small but
measurable benefit over ddr4 and our 16
gigs of tforce Delta RGB fit perfectly
in our budget we would have rather gone
with something a little bit faster but
that kind of trade-off is kind of our
point if we want something new we don't
always get a best-in Class part it has
gotten really hard to spec a
well-rounded th000 machine with all all
new gen Parts meanwhile in Tardis land
though we got that same 16 gig capacity
but this time right in the price
performance sweet spot with the only
downside being that when we want to
upgrade a few years down the road we're
going to need to replace our CPU RAM and
motherboard all in one Fell Swoop
speaking of motherboard this Asus Prime
B 550 ma is a pretty good value when
it's on sale for around
$100 meanwhile this gigabyte x870 gaming
plus Wi-Fi 6 ran us
$220 that is a huge difference but then
again so is Wi-Fi 6 pcie Gen 5 for both
the GPU and SSD not to mention an am5
socket which AMD has committed to
support until at least 2027 that means
new Chips new drivers and maybe most
importantly new security updates AMD has
recently said that they will not be
patching ryzen 1,000 2,000 or 3 3,000
series chips for the sink clo
vulnerability although they backtracked
on the 3,000 series after some Community
outrage and seeing as the latest 3000
Series came out in 2020 the same year
that we started getting 5,000 series
processors the end of support for our
older platform oh not that one this one
is probably coming soon clearly that
won't matter when it comes to our next
part though the case on this side we've
got a random old case that was cheap
and over here we've got the fantex
eclipse
g3a now in terms of size and features
they're both fairly similar but with
cases the devil's in the details good
ventilation Cable Management that's not
going to cut your fingers and some high
quality included fans very nice fantex
meanwhile over here this is what fit in
our budget heck yeah cool well
thankfully we probably won't need as
much cooling for these components cuz
we're not going to have it there is
Cable Management though and it's got one
fan included
I expect our Corsair cx650 watt to give
us a better long-term experience than
our $41 thermal T smart 600 watt but it
was the only thing that fit in this
budget and honestly speaking even our
better Corsair could end up near its
limit if you were to replicate these
builds we would strongly recommend a
juicier power supply for both of these
systems and if you are by the way we're
going to have all the parts linked down
below you'll notice that what's in the
system is not actually the 600 W one uh
this is such a crappy power supply it
wouldn't even boot the system is this
over budget now it's a $20 more for 60
more watts seems to be doing the trick
um but yeah for our cooler we settled on
the thermal right Phantom spirit it's so
nice we bought it
twice Yep this thing is so good we used
the same one for both systems which
actually brings us to the big difference
our gpus until the Nvidia RTX 5000
series comes out and I guess also maybe
eventually has an option that doesn't
cost more than our entire budget we are
stuck with the Zotac twin Edge RTX 4060
to be clear it's not a terrible card
it's got decent 1080p gaming performance
with the usual Nvidia features that turn
it into a far more compelling package
than its wimpy 8 gigs of vram would
normally allow I can see why it's
popular compared to its a equivalent but
here's the thing this XFX Speedster
Radeon 7800 XT is not an equivalent card
we were able to spend an extra
$200 on it thanks to our frugality
elsewhere so even though it's hard to
compare spec for spec across Team Green
and team red we can probably expect a
huge performance Delta not to mention
the double pcie bandwidth of course in
theory that shouldn't impact the real
world too much but hey why am I talking
about Theory time to put these systems
to the
test representing team brand new will be
David while I will be taking our old
machine not because I know the outcome
and I like winning because you're old
but you mean that one too easy let's
start with a cine bench drag race ready
and
go I'm tired I'm going to sit down I
guess I'm the old one
my knees
cracked I'm totally out
ofe he must have been trying to distract
from the fact that the all news system
is pulling ahead you know what the
difference isn't that much especially
when you consider that that is two
generations newer then I'm not really
sure what I expected cuz I have two more
cores let's move on to gaming I love
what you've done with the backgrounds by
the way Abe Simpson is my
familiar follows me around everywhere no
one else can see them I would think
1440p yeah that's what I been testing
everything 120 that's going to be pretty
rough 4060 not my problem I would also
be curious to run it at a lower
resolution to see if your faster cores
are a huge
benefit or are they even faster I got
x3d uh Your Game just crashed yeah
booted me out we were having some
trouble with Expo on this system that's
the thing it's technically overclocking
we might need to go back to J deck
settings that's not going to help your
performance numbers but it's the luck of
the
draw your performan is looking pretty
good yeah 350 350 FPS I'll take
it Oh I thought you had him oh I missed
I I like flinched I'm a I'm a flincher
uh well you haven't dropped below 200
and I seem to live there it's almost
like having a way better GPU makes a
pretty big difference for gaming who
have known Let's test my theory that I
could switch to very high and still have
better fps than you that's very high yep
oh hey I'm
winning barely though barely this is an
entire Notch up in in-game
settings and about the same level of
performance and I'm noticing my 1% low
is dropping to below 100 too actually
yeah my 1% lows are significantly better
than yours let's do Final Fantasy 16
next after about a 1 minute unskippable
cut scene we can jump right to the
pretty epic icon fight uh that'll give
us a pretty good indicator of what our
performance is going to be and this is a
very on topic game right now since this
is one of the big PlayStation 5
exclusives that has just come to PC
right on the heels of the launch of the
PS5 Pro and so if you guys want us to
make a PS5 Pro killer give this video a
thumbs up and we will make that happen
we wouldn't even need to save that much
money compared to this budget with how
expensive that thing
is
oh oh no oh wow oh
no not even 30 that's not close dude
that was chugging yeah that was below 20
I mean nvidia's got a lot of cool
technology to make up for having an
underpowered GPU like frame gen but
wouldn't you rather just have more
frames this is definitely a game that's
designed around upscaling uh which which
is a bit unfortunate but this is pretty
hopeless considering this is already
1440p but even I'm having frame drops in
the video I also couldn't help noticing
my GPU is running 20 cooler than yours
holy crap there's something to be said
for investing in a case with way better
airflow I mean I don't know how much it
would matter my GPU is pinned at 100%
just playing this freaking video this
may be an engine but capped but because
yours can barely handle it it's running
at 100% whereas mine's not that makes a
lot of sense chugging dude it's chug a
lugging look at that 15 FPS and this is
a $1,000 PC like this is a pretty hefty
investment and you haven't just blown
money on dumb stuff either you've spent
too much on your motherboard by getting
a top tier chipet second to top tier
that's true but other than that you
haven't really done anything stupid no I
legitimately tried to make a good $1,000
build it's hard you just tried a lot
harder over here no it's just easier
there's so many more choices and if you
guys think oh you guys just
cherry-picked a couple of games that run
way better on lineus this machine that's
not the case at all David already pre-
benchmarked a handful of other games and
even if we were able to get Expo running
on this machine it's not going to make
up the kind of difference we're
observing here it's night and day I'm
tempted to turn on frame
sure and see if you can even make up the
ground using that
okay well that gets you there it's
noticeably blurrier you can tell that
it's lower resolution but it's not bad
how does it feel it's pretty good it's
pretty Snappy I'm not upset we're making
a pretty good case for
DSS this went from a pretty unplayable
mess to it's not bad okay what about if
we're looking off into the distance okay
like how's the water look yours
definitely has a a little more uh
detailed resolved this is kind of it
almost feels less contrasty even though
these are the same monitors yep and it's
the same in the textures on the
character model mhm it's clearly a
little bit sharper for me oh yeah you
can really see that in the chain mail
yeah and to your point oh ew oh ew oh
not good so it can be pretty distracting
sometimes
and I haven't turned on any of my
upscaling if you just want to see FPS
number go up I got that too I really did
not get a lot of extra frames and I just
got a sharpness filter applied to
everything dang it FSR not nearly as
good hey and I'm getting my 30 FPS
cutcenes now I did
it incredible deal assassin frame gen
really is the compelling argument to
make for the the modern gen system and
it's worth noting that if you strongly
do prefer one brand of GPU over the
other it's not like we couldn't have put
an in card in our older gen system we
could have gone with 3070 or something
like that and you can even get some
really great deals on 3080s but we
decided for the sake of this video that
we weren't going to look at used cards
we were just going to stick to stuff
that you could buy brand new all that's
left now is to answer the question of
which of these systems would you buy let
us know in the comments the oldie but
goodie or the shiny new toy and also to
talk about what we've learned first of
all timing is everything thing the am5
platform is coming up on 3 years old
with the am4 platform crossing the
8-year Mark just recently so it's no
wonder that there's lots of deals to be
had here and not so many over here but
you can't take that for granted once
Nvidia cleared out their 3,000 series
chards they cleared them out and while
you still can find them brand new from
time to time it's pretty rare another
thing we learned is that generational
gains don't seem to Trump the savings of
buying older Hardware at least it's not
a guarantee
there were a lot of challenges in
picking the parts for these there's
going to be a float plane exclusive
closer look where David's going to be
discussing how allowing ourselves to
look at used Hardware might have
affected our choices either way it's
pretty clear that you should not lock
yourself into the newest releases PC
Hardware is not evolving at the same
Pace that it once was and you just don't
need the latest gear to have an
excellent experience what you do need is
this segue to our sponsor next too their
Aurora Pro Ultra short throw laser
projector can take that blank screen or
wall and turn it into a Wonderland of
buttery smooth Ultra Vivid colors it
touts a peak brightness of 2400 lumens
4K Dolby Vision support and built-in 60
WT speakers with Dolby Atmos support
plus with a maximum screen size of 150
in you won't just be watching your
content you will be experiencing it and
for you Gamers out there how does three
HDMI 2.1 ports and 8 milliseconds of
latency sound good yes you're you're
right and it gets even better nexo is
having their anniversary sale right now
and you can get the Aurora Pro and a
100in fresnal screen as a bundle and
save
$1,000 so go check that out using our
Link in the video description if you
guys enjoyed this video and you like
budget builds why not check out our
complete edit of scrapyard Wars 9 where
Luke and I competed to build the best PC
for
$800 no offense David but uh we crushed
you it's you I know it's you it's a
whole different game